Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lob. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Sheri Berman. She's a
Professor of Political Science at Barnard College at Columbia
University. And today we're talking about topics like the
history of the political, the left, social democracy, labor
movements, uh the rise of and the maintenance of
democracy, capitalism and also the recent rise of right
wing populism, fascist movement. So Dr Berman, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
I'm I'm happy to be here.
So starting with the left, then tell us a
little bit about uh o of course, we have
to be brief here because we don't have 10
hours to talk about the entire history of the
left. But uh tell us a little bit about
uh its origins historically and what at least originally
was its main ideology.
So, um so thanks, that's a great question. And
thanks for um starting us off by saying that
answering it would probably take us 10 hours or,
or more um entire libraries obviously have been written
on this topic. But, but if, if we were
to oversimplify which obviously one has to do in
this kind of context. I mean, the the origins
of the left, the modern left have to do
with um capitalism. I mean, obviously the terms left
and right come from the French revolution. But when
we think of the left today, what we're really
thinking about are the political parties, the labor movements
that arose in the second half of the 19th
century. And really they rose to deal with the
consequences or the implications of capitalism. So the, the
history of the left and the history of capitalism
have always been intertwined. Um THE most important figure
obviously in this um history is um Karl Marx.
Um AS the what became the sort of main
um thinker and the main ideology of the left
in the, again, second half of the 19th century
and the 20th century. And so beginning really, um
you know, around this time, what you had were
people movements who were really grappling with how to
think about where capitalism was going and what to
do about it primarily, but not exclusively through the
lens of Marx. Marx and Engels writings and the
people who interpreted those writings. So what we have
um basically by the, by the turn of the
century, the end of the 19th and 20th century
is this ideology having become dominant within the um
international left. Um Europe primarily was the sort of
um main ground for um debate were people who
were beginning actually to question some of the tenets
of Marxism. Um And so what you see then
is um debates about what the future of capitalism
is gonna be and what should be done about
it? And the international, what is that point? The
International Socialist movement begins to develop some very interesting
cleavages and divides that we can actually still see
echoes of in the left today. And so what
were those cleavages? The first was about how to
think about capitalism's development. That is to say, was
it kind of doomed to failure because it was
so horrible and was producing so many internal contradictions
and negative consequences is that it could not persist
through time and should not persist through time or
was it possible to kind of harness capitalism's upsides
while minimizing its downsides? So one really important cleavage
that begins to define the left from the late
19th century on is how to think about capitalism,
can it or should it be um salvaged, what
can or should be done to deal with it?
And then the second really important cleavage um related
to but somewhat different is about um political power.
So originally the Marxist version of capitalism's development was
kind of inexorable. It was without um a significant
emphasis on human agency. Capitalism's internal contradictions were going
to lead to certain kinds of developments and political
parties and social movements were really there to kind
of educate the masses to, to some degree perhaps
ameliorate consequences. But the ultimate driving force of history
was economic development, the development of capitalism. And a
lot of people found that very dispiriting and also
very unhelpful. And so another split that comes up
within the international socialist movement is how much emphasis
to place on political power. And so we get
a bunch of interesting cleavages based on these two
things. We get Leninists for instance, who believe that
capitalism is terrible needs to be overthrown. But that
it has to be done through political power because
it's not gonna happen on its own. We get
other people who think capitalism is terrible and it
might not be collapsing today, but it will collapse
eventually. And it's really the job of um you
know, socialists to kind of wait around for this
to happen again and sort of, you know, ameliorate
perhaps some of its negative consequences in the interim.
Those were the people who became sort of socialists,
democratic socialists, that kind of thing. You also had
the people who would become social democrats who believed
something quite different about capitalism. They believed, as I
said that it could be harnessed that its upsides
could be maximized and its downsides could be minimized.
But in order to do that socialists, people on
the left had to capture the democratic state. So
they oddly enough agreed with Leninists that political power
was central to the left, but they disagree with
Leninists in that they saw that political power as
being um embedded in a democratic state that they
could use the democratic state to control capitalism again,
to sort of get its good sides and minimize
its downsides. So you, again, by the early 20th
century, basically, what we have are the three camps
within the left that would determine it or, or
shape it or characterize it during the 20th century.
You got communists, Leninists, you got socialists. Um AND
you got social democrats and they all come from
the same original movement. They're all founded in a
grappling with Marxism, but they come to very different
conclusions. As I said, both about how to understand
capitalism and its development and what should be done
about it. Um And we're continuing to grapple with
these questions, same questions about capitalism and democracy today,
by the way, let me ask you uh particularly
during the 20th century because you mentioned Marx there
and you focused a lot on the ending of
the 19th century, beginning of the 20th century. But
uh uh I mean, do we know what extent
uh the communist revolution in Russia and then the
Soviet Union uh influenced how uh the left in
general looks at and thinks about uh Mars and
particularly communism. Uh SINCE uh I mean, we know
how it worked out and was applied in Russia
and the Soviet Union. I, I mean, were there
uh among leftists uh reactions to that because I
mean, in a sense after, uh, the rise of
the Soviet Union and then later it's fall, uh,
by then people would at least point or have,
uh, something to point at when it comes to
rep, uh, making claims about what would happen if
communism or perhaps socialism, I mean, beca because sometimes
even distinguishing communism from socialism is a bit tricky
in a way also because even within Marxist uh,
uh ideology, let's say. And in the, even in
the words of Marx itself, he himself, I mean,
there was a uh a, an initial phase that
would be socialism and then communism would come later
on. Uh So I, I mean, how did the
left react to all of what happened in the
Soviet Union with, uh let's say, applied communism if
we could, if we could call it that.
So that's the great question. And also a very
big one. I mean, at this point, um you
know, at the, in the sort of first quarter
of the 21st century, it's really almost impossible to
separate interpretations of Marxism from the real existing communism
that um we had in the Soviet Union or
China. Now, you know, there is a, there is
a very long and um heated debate that went
on among leftist scholars, whether or not real existing
communism reflected what Marx either wanted or predicted. I
mean, he was a thinker, he was an intellectual,
he was not a leader of a political movement.
He didn't he wasn't around to see how the
Soviet Union or China or other communist countries developed.
So, you know, we don't know what he would
have thought and you know, what he would have
preferred. But it's very hard today to separate, you
know, marks from those things, which is in some
ways unfair. But it's just, you know, it's kind
of the reality of the way history had, um,
had developed. And there's also, of course, it's, it's
also very important to note that once the Soviet
Union was formed, the access that people had to.
Marx's writings was also very much shaped by that
because of course, the communists were very eager to
put out, you know, um Marxist writings, but they
emphasize some of his writings more than others, you
know, whatever the later Marx, the more deterministic Mars
as opposed to the more humanistic Mars. But that,
but, you know, those are debates perhaps that scholars,
you know, have had and will continue to have.
I think, you know, what, what we, what we
know now, right is that, you know, the Soviet
Union and Communist China, um you know, by a
dein democracy alongside eliminating capitalism, created pathologies that may,
that were certainly, I would say worse than the
original pathologies created by capitalism itself. Um And so,
you know, that has kind of to a large
degree discredited, that particular strand of leftist thinking. Um
I think there are very few people these days
who want to go back to communism as it
existed. Although there are obviously very many people who
still believe capitalism is um evil. It cannot be
modified in any sim in any significant way and
has to be gotten rid of. But fortunately, there
are not that many people around advocating the kind
of violent revolutionary overthrows that um you know, someone
like Lenin or Mao engaged in when the Soviet
Union was formed after the Russian revolution. Of course,
it, it transformed the international left most practically because
communist parties formed in almost all countries during that
interwar period. And these communist parties were um not
only obviously opposed to the um to capitalism, but
they were also opposed to democracy. And so in
Europe, for instance, communist parties during the interwar years,
very much work to undermine democracy, often engaging in
sort of violent uprisings and were therefore complicit in,
you know, the downfall of democracy in many European
countries. Um YOU know, so the communism very much
a sort of, you know, an incredibly important part
of the left story during the 20th century and
grappling with its legacy after the collapse of the
Soviet Union. And um you know, even earlier the
revelation of the crimes that were committed in the
Soviet Union and China really shaped um the way
the left evolved and communist parties in Europe, for
instance, that um you know, existed during the post
war period, um having to deal with those, um,
crimes of the Soviet Union over the course of
the post war period did, for the most part
moderate. That's why we got sort of a euro
communist movement in western Europe and these parties, you
know, sort of drew away from the violent anti
democratic imperialist nature of the Soviet Union and tried
to find some kind of way to, um, stay
true to their opposition to capitalism. But jettison again,
the sort of anti democratic, violent and imperialist parts
of the, um, of the, of, of what real
existing communism looked like, um, that ended up being
a sort of dead end. Um, THOSE that movement
ended up, you know, sort of going nowhere. But,
um, but, you know, it has been to some
degree, um, looked back towards by people today on
the left who really feel that communism. I'm sorry
that capitalism cannot and should not be allowed to
persist. But they're not interested again in the, the
sort of violent anti democratic imperialist aspects of what
real existing communism turned into.
So, among the three strands of leftism that we,
you identified that came out of the 19th century,
namely socialism, Marxist communism and social democracy. Would you
say that at least nowadays, the main one among
leftists would be social democracy or not?
Well, so I would say it, it, you know,
it depends a little bit on the part of
the world you're looking at. If we, if we
stick to Europe, for example, um social democracy ended
up being the sort of dominant strand on the
left during the post war period. That is to
say a kind of social democratic worldview ended up
being the dominant one within most European left parties
during the post war period. That is to say
an acceptance of capitalism combined with a recognition of
its dangers and downsides and this commitment to democracy,
right? And a belief that these things could go
together, right? That by gaining power in the democratic
state, you could really mitigate all of these terrible
consequences of capitalism. Now, of course, during the late
20th century, this view or this vision or this
perspective began to kind of um weaken and almost
disappear. Um As many of these parties kind of
moved so far to the center on economics, kind
of adopting, you know, what came to be known
as whatever third way is in Europe, progressive neoliberalism
in the United States. And that kind of vision
of um look, it is really important for the
left to remain cognizant of capitalism's downsides even as
they accept that they are no longer committed to
destroying it, right? And they, they moved so far
towards accepting a view of capitalism is relatively beneficent
and efficient. The idea that many of its downsides,
it kind of whatever disappeared or were no longer
relevant that they kind of lost that part of
what social democracy in any case meant, right. Which
was that it not only accepted capitalism, but it
also accepted how important it was to keep it
sort of constrained. Um And so that, that social
democratic vision weirdly enough began to dissipate after the
collapse of the Soviet Union took down with it,
you know, adherence to old fashioned communism. So what
the left stands for now is very unclear because
the collapse of communism and the incredible weakening or
watering down of social democracy has now left the
left, so to speak without a very clear profile,
a defining stance towards capitalism which has always been
to mix metaphor, to get and to get back
to what we talked about. Initially, it's Raisin detra,
right? I mean, this is what the left is
about. The left is about grappling with capitalism. But
that aspect of its essence really, as I said,
became watered down or dissipated by the end of
the 20th century.
So, and uh as you described earlier in the
19th century, leftism is very much tied to labor
movements, workers rights, stuff like that. So, but nowadays,
um how does social democracy relate to labor, labor
movements and things like syndicalism? Because particularly since mentioned
there with the rise of perhaps progressive neoliberalism in
the US and the third way in the UK
and a little bit across Europe. Um I mean,
it seems that uh la uh labor movements, labor
rights, syndicalism and so on are no longer at,
at least at the forefront of uh at least
the social democracy,
right?
Sure.
So, I mean, at the same time as you
were seeing the growth of left political parties, late
19th century, 20th century, you were seeing the growth
of labor movements overall, most, most importantly, represented by
unions as well, right? So unions and left parties
grew up together, often the left parties grew out
of unions and, and they interact with and cooperated
with each other sort of throughout this time. And,
and during the last decades, at the same time,
as parties of the left have declined, so have
labor unions and the other, you know, organizations, civil
society, organizations that would have encompassed the labor movement
and those things obviously go together. I mean, the
weakening of the left and the weakening of labor
movements are part and parcel of the same trend
and they feed into each other. Right. Left parties
have always depended for instance, on unions for mobilization
for the creation of working class identities in the
past, also often for their very leaders. And so,
you know, these kinds of things are part of
a larger trend. They are also related to some
obviously very important social and demographic changes. The number
of traditional working class people has declined uh declined
during the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Capitalism
changed, right? We have fewer, you know, sort of
large factories and um industry is a less important
part of western economies. Than it would have been.
And what we've seen in its place is the
rise of service sector industries, which often do not
have better working conditions or wages than industrial workplaces
had, but differ very much in um you know,
the kinds of experiences that people who work within
them have. And so traditional union organizing um was
designed again in for an industrial workplace, not for
people who are working in retail stores, fast food
outlets who are low level workers in offices. And
so, you know, as the economy changed, um labor
movements did not change. And so they began also
to kind of lose their hold over populations. And
so union density levels are just a fraction in
many European countries of what they were during the
post war decades. And all of these things have
really fed into each other to diminish the power
of the left diminish the power of um of
workers broadly defined in the economy and to really
change the dynamics of capitalism because the countervailing force
of the unions and left parties is just not
as strong as it was during the post war
decades.
And particularly with um progressive neoliberalism. I mean, I
find it very interesting how there's a progressive uh
strand of neoliberalism because looking back historically, in terms
of what the left uh it stood for. Uh
I mean, with neoliberalism, we associate with the regulation
of the market with uh weakening of workers' rights,
with pre pre organization of the w of working
conditions and all of that. So, I, I mean,
how, how is it that we nowadays can, can
have among leftists, something that apparently runs, runs counter
to what the left historically uh stood for.
So, I mean, that is a really great question.
I mean, in, you know, from the perspective of
2024 it can be a little hard to understand
why the left moved so far away from its
traditional wariness of capitalism. And I say that just
because we've had, we've had a financial crisis, we've
now had growing inequality. We can see the fallout
from inequality from in insecurity from all of these
things, right? And so with the benefit of hindsight,
it looks like that move was just an incredibly
um wrong headed one. I think if we go
back to the 19 nineties, though, we can sort
of understand not excuse maybe but understand why that
move seemed to make sense to people at the
time, I would say two things were really crucial.
One was of course, that Western economies did experience
some real problems in the seventies and eighties. Um
YOU know, inflation slowed growth, rising unemployment. And so
traditional, the traditional kind of economic measures that the
left had relied on just were not as effective
as they had been during the post war decades.
So there's absolutely that and that in turn fed
the rise of kind of neo liberal ideas, neo
liberal movements, neo liberal thinkers, because they could look
to these problems and say, look, we have ideas
about how to solve these and these old left
ideas are no longer viable. And then the collapse
of the Soviet Union really kind of created this
triumphalism about liberal democratic capitalism. This belief, not only
that it had obviously succeeded where its main competitor
had failed, but that, that success reflected its inherent
stability and its inherent ability to kind of overcome
crises. And so, you know, this combination of problems
with post war policies and ideas and the sort
of triumphalism that accompanied the collapse of the Soviet
Union. I think really convinced many leaders on the
left that they could abandon some of their wariness
of capitalism, except some of these neo liberal ideas
about, you know, um capitalism's effectiveness, its ability to
kind of solve its own problems and create sort
of equilibria and stability, the need for less state
intervention, less state regulation. And so again, you know,
the nineties were a very different time than the
20 twenties are. But as we can see, in
retrospect, these ideas turned out to be very wrong
headed, wrong headed because they've created huge economic problems
for sure. I mean, we can draw a line
from the neoliberalism of the 19 nineties, right through
the financial crisis, growing inequality, growing insecurity, diver divergences
within economies, growing divergences within economies between rural urban
areas. All of these economic problems and then of
course, a whole variety of political problems as well
because those economic problems alongside a bunch of other
things really um lie at the root of um
growing dissatisfaction with democracy and the increasing success of
populism.
So let's talk about democracy then. Um HOW do
you look at the current state of democracy? And
perhaps here we can perhaps talk about two different
uh I mean, about democracy in different parts of
the world, like old democracies, like the ones in
the US and Western Europe, particularly and new democracies,
particularly the ones that arose during the third wave
in Eastern Europe and elsewhere. So tell us a
little bit about that.
So the collapse of the Soviet Union brought a
whole bunch of changes. We talked about one it
facilitated or propelled the rise of neoliberalism, but the
other change that it brought perhaps the most obvious
changes, obviously, all of these countries that had been
part of the Soviet Empire were granted independence and
became at least initially democracy, Eastern Europe, for example,
parts of Central Asia, all of these, all of
these places. So we got a huge wave of
democratization at the end of the 20th century. Um
POLITICAL scientists call it the third wave of democratization
um to sort of um give it some historical
reference to earlier times when you had um large
numbers of countries making transitions to democracy at the
same time. So we have a huge number of
countries that make transitions to democracy at the end
of the 20th century, um in Europe and elsewhere
and, um, you know, some of these countries do
well and others do less. Well, I mean, one
of the things we know from previous waves is
that many new democracies don't succeed. That's one of
the reasons we call them waves. Not only to
kind of get you to think about a lot
of things happening at the same time, but because
all waves have under toes, right? And so, you
know, we expect that a lot of new democracies
will not succeed because they don't have the whatever
you want to call them conditions or prerequisites for
democratic success and in particular countries that have not
had experience with democracy in the past, um that
don't have legacies that they can build on, those
tend to be particularly vulnerable. So even in places
like Portugal and Spain, which made transitions during the
third wave, although not obviously as a result of
the collapse of the Soviet Union, these cases were
more successful. There's lots of reasons for that, but
one is that they had some experience with democracy
in the past. And so that not only meant
they could learn lessons from the mistakes, but there
was some history of political parties, a free press,
uh independent civil society that they could look back
and build upon. This was not true for the
countries of Eastern Europe, they had no real experience
with democracy and frankly, very little experience being independent
countries at all. They formed after the collapse of
empires at the end of the first World War,
and then they were very quickly absorbed under Nazi
rule and then into the Soviet Empire. So these
countries make transitions to democracy at the end of
the 20th century without previous democratic experience. And also
having to grapple with the challenges of independent existence,
right, national sovereignty, um who's a member of the
nation, all those kinds of things. So you know
that a lot of these countries in Eastern Europe,
like many new democracies turn out to have some
real problems. Should not surprise us. It should sadden
us, but it should not really surprise us. I
think what um is most worrying to scholars who
study democracy today is not the fact that many
new democracies have proven weak and vulnerable again that,
that saddens us but but from a comparative and
historical perspective does not surprise us. What is somewhat
surprising is that many long established democracies, like the
one that exists in the United States. And like
those in Western Europe experienced some real problems, particularly
in the United States, which um almost every scholar
who studies democracies thinks is in much worse shape
than Western Europe as far as democracy is concerned.
And that is somewhat new democracy was considered secure
in the United States, not complete. Obviously, there were
always of problems with our democracy but, but not,
not vulnerable to backsliding um or um you know,
significant democratic erosion. And in fact, it is proven
to be um vulnerable to these things. And this
is somewhat surprising and therefore worrying and puzzling to
scholars of democracy.
So, you know, something that I find a bit
confusing, particularly here in Europe is why, particularly after
the financial crisis of 2008, there's been uh a
rise uh of right wing populism, but we haven't
seen the same on the other end. I mean,
o on the other side on the left, I
mean, do we have any idea why? That's the
case?
So that's, that's a, that is a puzzle and
one that uh you know, other social scientists have
tried to explain, given the um the incredible um
suffering caused by the financial crisis, one might have
predicted that that suffering so to speak would benefit
the left because obviously the cause of it was
neoliberalism unconstrained capitalism, yada, yada. And in fact, what
we've seen is just the opposite that it's not
in the left that has benefited but the populist
even far, right. Um Now, one of the reasons
for this one is probably um the reason that
we talked about before, which is that the left
had become so disassociated with a wariness of capitalism,
a critique of capitalism and frankly, um in both
Europe and the United States implicated in many of
the neo liberal reforms that were seen as having
led directly to that financial crisis, that people did
not see the left as a solution to the
problems that were revealed by the financial crisis, but
very much implicated in causing it. And I think
there is a lot of truth to that. There's
simply no doubt that left wing parties as we
talked about had advocated and in many cases, implemented
many of the changes and reforms that um helped
to cause the financial crisis. And so it was
very hard for them to legitimately claim to voters
that they were the best solution to a problem
that they themselves had help cause, not, not exclusively,
of course, but had helped cause. And so we
can see perhaps in some way, the long term
consequences of the dilution or the watering down of
the left's traditional um economic profile, that is to
say, a wariness of capitalism, uh prioritization of constraining
its negative consequences. And then the flip side of
that is that right wing populist parties proved to
be extremely effective in turning a lot of the
suffering and grievances that came out of not just
the financial crisis, but the negative consequences of neo
liberal capitalism over time. Again, that we talked about
growing inequality, insecurity, deepening rural urban divides in shifting
the blame for that to a combination of out
of touch, elites, you know, highly educated people like
ourselves who had been running the show and um
you know, immigrants and um minorities who were taking
a disproportionate share of the resources and um not
playing by the rules of the game and therefore
also partially to blame for, um, you know, the
suffering and the um insecurity that other citizens were
increasingly subject to, um, you know, from, from the
early 21st century and particularly from the financial crisis
on.
Mhm. Yeah. Earlier, I've asked you actually about reactions
to communism in the Soviet Union, particularly because when
it comes to criticisms of capitalism, it seems that
nowadays, I mean, even here in Portugal, we still
have the Communist Party and we have uh another
uh left wing party that is very close to
the Communist when the Western in English would probably
be left the leftist block uh where even in
its origins, uh it had even Maoists and stalinists
there. So you see how far uh they would
go at least originally now, not so much. But
uh e even when here people try to make
even the tiniest positive comments on uh the former
Soviet Union or refer to Mars and people like
that. I, I mean, uh it, it gets a
really bad rap nowadays be because people associate it
immediately with dictatorship and the Gulags and all of
that. So.
Right. Right. The other, the other thing that's important
to note to, to sort of get back to
the, a little bit to that previous question is
that you know, those right wing populists um were
also in addition to being very skilled at kind
of turning resentment and frustration towards um elites and,
and immigrants also um taking advantage of the the
left's kind of watering down or dilution of its
economic profile during the um early 21st century and
particularly around the time of the financial crisis, really
shifted their own economic profile. So, you know, when
the first wave of these parties, right wing populist
parties that is to say emerged in the late
20th century, they tended to have kind of thatcherite
reaganite, neo liberal economic profile, small state um cuts
to the welfare state, lower taxes, all these kinds
of things. But you know, as the left shifted
to the center and as many of um you
know, many low income, low educated voters, people who
were suffering a lot from again, globalization changes in
capitalism, uh changes in trade as those people began
to kind of shift away from left wing parties,
these right wing populists realized that there was a
great opportunity for them to capture these voters and
more generally to capture a lot of the resentments
that were growing in society. So, you know, one
of the other palpable trends of the early 21st
century in Western Europe. This would actually later happen
in eastern Europe as well is that these right
wing populist parties began to change their own economic
profile. So they began to um criticize globalization. They
began to criticize free trade. They became advocates of
what is sometimes referred to as welfare chauvinism. That
is to say we favor a strong welfare state,
but only for, you know, native born citizens. Um
THEY favor a strong state, a strong national state
that can both fight back against, you know, international
economic trends, as well as international whatever organizations and
forces that are trying to, you know, get our
countries to um you know, engage in practices that
are not helpful for our own citizens. So these
right wing populist parties really changed their own economic
profile to, to make themselves into much more viable
critics of what you might consider to be whatever
neo liberalized, globalized capitalism. And this is a large
part of the story of um their success and
a large part of the story of why voting
patterns and um you know, party systems have also
really changed in Western Europe over the past decades.
So you mentioned globalization there and on the side
of the left, how have people been thinking about
globalization and dealing with it uh theoretically and so
on? I mean, what do leftist people particularly nowadays
have to say about globalization?
Well, globalization is a big, a big word and
um you know, it can mean a lot of
different things. I mean, there was generally a sort
of embrace of globalization, both um socially and economically
as we've already talked about in the 19 nineties.
That is to say the idea that, you know,
a sort of more globalized capitalism and a more
open trade system. Um YOU know, all those kinds
of things that, that was generally a good thing.
Um But also going along with, you know, free
flow of trade and goods and um financial flows
and all these kinds of things also came obviously
um a greater, greater um flows of citizens or
people back and forth across borders. And that was
also to a significant degree um embraced by the
left during the late 20th century. And you know,
this is obviously also generated something of a backlash,
right? Because as we've had really massive immigration flows
in Western Europe and also in the United States
where we've had, you know, we've had some experience
in the past in the US with massive immigration
flows. Although there's been really a huge jump over
the past decade or decade and a half. I
mean, these also that aspect of globalization, the freer
movement of people, as well as the freer movement
of freer movement of goods and money has also
created a whole variety of challenges and problems, not
just for the left, but for um Western societies
more generally. Um BECAUSE dealing with all of these
people often coming from really difficult backgrounds is a
huge financial challenge, a huge social challenge. And um
you know, again, it has created a lot of
problems as well as obviously a backlash that um
folks on the populist right were able to um
take advantage of.
So something I haven't asked you directly about yet
is fascism. And with the current rise of the
right of right wing populism, people are worried about
the possible return of fascism across Europe. And so
uh and elsewhere. So what is exactly the relationship
between populism and fascism?
So um so great another, another really um important
question. So, I mean, look, oftentimes these terms are
conflated. Um And I think that that is um
understandable but somewhat dangerous. Um TO my mind, fascism
means something very specific. It's obviously linked to movements
that appeared in Europe. Um DURING the interwar years,
these were anti democratic movements, very anti democratic movements,
they were illiberal movements, they were overtly racist movements,
they were revolutionary, they were violent, inherently violent, they,
you know, included um paramilitary units, they were very
willing to use violence against their own citizens as
well as in many cases internationally fascism. I mean,
means something very specific. It doesn't just mean, you
know, we don't like immigrants, it doesn't just mean
we don't like elites, it doesn't just mean, you
know, we have criticisms of real existing democracy, it
means something very specific, right? So, so I'm very
hesitant to use that term lightly and I'm very,
very hesitant to conflate it to conflate fascism in
any movement or party that is on the right.
So I, I want to just state that sort
of openly right up front when we look at
right wing populist parties in Europe across Europe today.
Um I think we see a very, a very
broad continuum. Um SOME of these parties have become
over time, what I would actually consider to be
more national conservative in a way than even right
wing populism. So if we look at something like,
you know, Marine Le Pen's National front, national rally,
that party has moderated really quite a lot since
the time when it was run by her father,
he was an open holocaust denier, openly racist. Um
His commitments to the democratic rules of the game
were very unclear right to gain power, to gain
legitimacy, to gain more voters. She has her the
the daughter in addition to overthrowing her father in
a kind of palace coup has very much tried
to de demonize that party and she has really
shifted its positions in a very, in a very
significant way. Um You know, she is not anti
democratic, at least openly. She has traded her father's
open racism and anti Semitism for criticisms of immigration
that really focus on a assimilation and b economic
concerns. Um You know, so this is a much,
this is a party that is conservative in some
ways, not in others, like I said on economics,
it is not conservative at all. It is a
nationalist party in the sense that, you know, it
is very wary of immigration. And very much for
national sovereignty. Um I would not characterize that party
in its current form as anti Democratic at all.
And so I think inflating that, you know, the
contemporary national rally with fascism is a very big
mistake, not only because it's really confusing the phenomenon,
but it, it, it indicates very different ways of
dealing with it when you are dealing with a
fascist party, a party that is absolutely committed to
overthrowing democracy by violence, if necessary, the kinds of
means that you would use to fight that party
are very different than the kinds of means that
I think are legitimate to use to fight back
against a party like the national rally. Now, there
are parties in Europe that are clearly um anti
democratic. There's a bunch of them as we um
alluded to earlier in eastern Europe parties that have,
you know, are not interested in playing by democratic
rules of the game that have tried to undermine
the democratic rules of the game successfully in Hungary
semi successfully in Poland. I still would not consider
those parties fascist. Although they are clearly anti democratic,
there are parties that are anti Democratic in Western
Europe. The A FD is the most obvious one.
But there, it's really quite a broad range of
parties um uh in that or under that right
wing populist rubric. Um AND there are not that
many of them that I would term fascist, although
some of them um have questionable commitments to democracy
and then others do not. I mean, we have
had that, uh I'm sorry, we have had right
wing populist parties in power in many West European
countries in Denmark. Obviously. Now in Italy, they've been
part of governing coalitions, uh Denmark, Finland and other
places and there has been no democratic erosion, there
may have been some shift in policies but no
democratic erosion. And so, you know, really thinking about
these parties under the framework of fascism, I think
is really um quite misleading.
And what can we do to avoid democratic erosion?
Well, what we can do to avoid democratic erosion
is to have democratic parties and politicians, that is
to say people who are committed parties who are
committed to democratic rules of the game solve the
problems that um their citizens are facing. I mean,
we have some real challenges in Europe and in
the United States, economic challenges which we've already mentioned
growing inequality, slow growth, increasing economic insecurity, growing divergences
between again, rural and urban areas and again, huge
demographic changes in many Western European societies, incredibly large
numbers of immigrants and obviously immigrants can be an
incredible source of strength, not only economically but socially
right, diversity is a potentially great thing, but governments
have to be able to deal with these challenges.
They have to show people that um diversity means
stronger economies, more attractive societies and that requires policies
to integrate people, to provide them with jobs, to
provide them with education, to not make citizens feel
like they are competing with each other for resources.
And when, when government deal with the challenges that
their societies face, there's less dissatisfaction, there's less resentment
and therefore fewer people who are willing to vote
for parties that claim the establishment is corrupt, the
system is corrupt and we should just blow the
whole thing up. So, I mean, ultimately dealing with
populism and dealing with democratic decay means that mainstream
parties and committed Democrats, small d Democrats, people who
are committed to democracy really need to look at
the kinds of grievances. People have the challenges their
societies face and come up with viable and attractive
solutions to those challenges. If they do so, then
the constituency for populism will decline and dissatisfaction with
democracy will dissipate.
So let me ask you one last question, then
then talking again about uh leftism since we started
our conversation by talking a little bit about the
history of the left throughout the 19, in the
19th 20th and 21st centuries. Um How do you
look at the future of leftism, particularly looking at
the main current challenges that we have to deal
with?
So I would say western societies and in that,
I mean, Europe, the United States, Canada, whatever that
we really face two main challenges and they're, they're
not new challenges. Um BUT there and but, but
they have a new form the first challenge is
the challenge we began by talking about, which is
the challenge of capitalism. Um Capitalism is the best
system that we have so far for generating economic
growth and innovation, which um we all need societies
need. Um But it has also some very, very
dangerous tendencies and consequences both from an economic perspective
and from a social and political perspective, right? And
what we've seen, I think since the 19 nineties
was that the balance between sort of capitalism and
the state um was out of whack capitalism grew
increasingly so to speak, unconstrained and the negative consequences
of that were really quite dire. So, I mean,
I think the first challenge that we face is
figuring out once again how to maximize capitalism's upsides.
We want to generate growth, we want to generate
innovation, but we need to minimize its downsides. We
cannot have severe economic dislocations and crises. We cannot
have growing inequality, we cannot have growing insecurity, all
of those things generate social divisions, political resentments and
they are just unsustainable. So the first challenge that
we face and the first challenge that I think
the left should be at the forefront of dealing
with is the challenge of how to recreate that
kind of balance between capitalism's upsides and downsides. The
left lost the lead a little bit on that
in the late 20th century and figuring out how
to sharpen its profile, how to put forward a
program that is both attractive and effective for doing
that thing, maximizing upsides, minimizing downsides that is necessary
both for successful left and successful democracy. The other
great challenge is the challenge of diversity, right? Western
societies are more diverse than they have been before.
They are not only more diverse for the obvious
reasons that we've had incredible amounts of immigration. If
you look at some countries in Western Europe, um
you know, Scandinavian countries, other countries, these are countries
that have very little history of dealing with this
kind of diversity and they have changed demographically in
an incredible way in the last several decades. This
is an incredible challenge. It has not been sufficiently
thought through um or dealt with by either the
left or other mainstream parties, but it's not just
the diversity comes from immigration in a wonderful way.
Since the 19 sixties, societies have become more diverse
in the sense that women and other minorities have
demanded full and equal rights that they should be
incorporated as full and equal citizens without discrimination and
without prejudice in all of the rights of citizenship.
And this is an important indeed, very positive change.
But again, one that requires adaptation and bringing citizens
along, right? So dealing with this challenge of diversity,
the challenge and incredible promise of pluralism. This is
the other great challenge of the 21st century, one
that I think that the left is again, uniquely
positioned to deal with. Um BUT has lost, I
think a little bit of the thread over the
last couple of decades, but absolutely needs to be
thinking about how to um again, rec uh rather
reconcile diversity and democracy just as we need to
reconcile capitalism and democracy. These are the two great
challenges. They are not new challenges, but they have
reemerged. I think in a very powerful way in
the last few decades and they really will determine,
I think both the future of the left and
the health of democracy in the years to come.
So if listeners and viewers are interested in learning
more about the topics we explore there today, where
can they find you when you work on the
internet?
Well, I mean, I'm, I'm an academic so um
I can be easily found just by Googling my
name. I have a website that has um links
to my books and to my articles. And there
are actually in addition to myself, obviously an incredible
number of scholars and organizations working on these topics
on the topic, for instance, of how to um
manage 21st century capitalism. I would say that over
the last decade or two, particularly since the financial
crisis, there has actually been an explosion of um
promising progressive work on this topic um out there
and so much more hopeful on, you know, new
policies, new approaches to dealing with capitalism than I
would have been before. And there's just lots of
great work out there um on these topics that
hopefully people will read and think about and use
when they decide how to vote and how to
try to influence um policies in their own countries.
So, Doctor Berman, thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a real pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you very much.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
Learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitting B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
Nai Zuk, Mark Nevs called in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken
Herz J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S friends,
David Sloan Wilson Yasa dear, Roman Roach Diego and
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi, Nale me, Gary G Alman, Samo Zal
Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lati Gilon Cortez or
Solis Scott. Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter
Wo David Williams Di A Costa. Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson Chris to
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan Nicholas
Carlson Ismael Bensley Man George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perros,
Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jan Ner Urla. Good enough Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca stuffin, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers Matthew Lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all